<!-- Copyright (c)  2009  Glen E. Ivey
     Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
     under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3;
     with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
     A copy of the license is in the file COPYING.DOCUMENTATION
  -->


In general, a [[WmHelp:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Wontology|wontology]] can be created completely from scratch, using no previously-defined "vocabulary" ([[WmHelp:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Node|nodes]], especially [[WmHelp:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Property|Property]] nodes).  However, a number of improvements in editing or displaying the contents of the wontology are possible when the software used (like [[WmHelp:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_WontoMedia|WontoMedia]]) understands the semantics and intended meaning in some of the terms.  In addition, if the content of a wontology is to be exchanged with other systems, it is helpful if it uses, or its internal vocabulary is based on, standardized node [[WmHelp:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Name|Names]] and meanings.

In order to allow WontoMedia to enforce rules (such as the fact that a [[WmHelp:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Relationship|relationship]] cannot be both [[WmHelp:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Hierarchical|hierarchical]] and [[WmHelp:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Peer|peer-to-peer]]) and to improve display, there is a set of built-in Property nodes (relationship types).  When adding material to a wontology, these properties can be used directly <em>or</em> they can be used as the basis for creating new properties with names and meanings more specific to the particular information being described.  Most of our [[WmHelp:Tutorials|tutorials]] show the use of built-in properties directly, but [[WmHelp:Tutorials/UsingSPO|the tutorial "Using sub_property_of"]] gives examples of how you can create a new property specific to your information based on the built-in properties.

The rest of this page lists all of the built-in properties provided by WontoMedia and the types of relationships they are intended to represent.

<!-- illustration: hierarchy of relationships between built-in properties -->
Built-in properties alphabetically:
[[#anchor_child_of|child_of]] &mdash;
[[#anchor_contains|contains]] &mdash;
[[#anchor_hierarchical_relationship|hierarchical_relationship]] &mdash;
[[#anchor_inverse_relationship|inverse_relationship]] &mdash;
[[#anchor_one_of|one_of]] &mdash;
[[#anchor_ordered_relationship|ordered_relationship]] &mdash;
[[#anchor_parent_of|parent_of]] &mdash;
[[#anchor_peer_of|peer_of]] &mdash;
[[#anchor_predecessor_of|predecessor_of]] &mdash;
[[#anchor_sub_property_of|sub_property_of]] &mdash;
[[#anchor_successor_of|successor_of]] &mdash;
[[#anchor_symmetric_relationship|symmetric_relationship]] &mdash;
[[#anchor_value_relationship|value_relationship]]

Built-in properties grouped by use:
* [[#anchor_sub_property_of|sub_property_of]]
* [[#anchor_value_relationship|value_relationship]], [[#anchor_hierarchical_relationship|hierarchical_relationship]], [[#anchor_ordered_relationship|ordered_relationship]]
* [[#anchor_symmetric_relationship|symmetric_relationship]], [[#anchor_inverse_relationship|inverse_relationship]], [[#anchor_peer_of|peer_of]]
* [[#anchor_parent_of|parent_of]], [[#anchor_child_of|child_of]]
* [[#anchor_contains|contains]], [[#anchor_one_of|one_of]]
* [[#anchor_predecessor_of|predecessor_of]], [[#anchor_successor_of|successor_of]]

<span id="anchor_peer_of"></span>
;peer_of
:'''Peer Of''' A relationship of this type between two nodes indicates a relationship between equals.  This would be appropriate, for example, as a description of the "synonym" relationship that might occur between the entries for two words in a thesaurus. WontoMedia makes two assumptions about items that have a Peer-Of relationship to each other.  First, the relationship is assumed to be bidirectional.  Saying that "A is a Peer-Of B" implies that "B is a Peer-Of A", and it doesn't matter which of the two "directions" is used when the relationship is first created. Second, when showing the graph of relationships between items, WontoMedia will attempt to indicate Peer-Of relationships as primarily horizontal.
<span id="anchor_one_of"></span>
;one_of
:'''One Of''' A relationship of this type between two nodes is hierarchical. This relationship states that the subject (left-hand side) of the relationship ("A" in the relationship "A is One-Of B", and like "macintosh" in "macintosh is One-Of computer") is assumed to be more specific or more narrow than the object of the relationship ("B" and "computer").  When showing a graph of relationships between items, WontoMedia will attempt to indicate 'One-Of' relationships as primarily vertical, with the object-item drawn nearer "the root" of the graph and the subject-item toward "the leaves". <br />'One Of' is most appropriate for showing relationships between an item and a category.  Relationships between two categories are better indicated with 'Child Of', as in "computer is Child-Of electronics" (assuming, of course, that they're both categories). <br />'One Of' is itself a child of 'Child Of'.  And 'Child Of' is the opposite of 'Parent Of', and finally 'Contains' is a child of 'Parent Of'.  So, it might be possible to infer that 'One Of' and 'Contains' are approximate opposites of each other.  However, making a 'One Of' relationship between two nodes will not automatically cause the symmetric 'Contains' relationship to be created.
<span id="anchor_contains"></span>
;contains
:'''Contains''' A relationship of this type between two nodes is hierarchical. This relationship states that the subject (left-hand side) of the relationship ("A" in the relationship "A Contains B", and like "spacecraft" in "spacecraft Contains apollo") is more general or broad than the object of the relationship ("B" and "apollo"). When showing a graph of relationships between items, WontoMedia will attempt to indicate 'Contains' relationships as primarily vertical, with the subject-item drawn nearer "the root" of the graph and the object-item toward "the leaves". <br />'Contains' is most appropriate for showing relationships between a category and an item.  Relationships between two categories are better indicated with 'Parent Of', as in "vehicle Contains spacecraft" (assuming, of course, that both are categories). <br />'Contains' is actually Child-Of 'Parent Of'.  'Parent Of' and 'Child Of' are opposites of each other, and 'One Of' is a child of 'Child Of'.  But this does not make 'Contains' and 'Child Of' opposites of each other, though an approximation of opposite-ness could be inferred.  WontoMedia will not automatically cause a 'Child Of' relationship to be created when a 'Contains' relationship is.
<span id="anchor_parent_of"></span>
;parent_of
:'''Parent Of''' This is the fundamental type of hierarchical relationship.  This relationship states that the subject (left-hand side) of the relationship ("A" in the relationship "A is the Parent-Of B", and like "vehicle" in "vehicle is Parent-Of spacecraft") is a super-set of the object of the relationship ("B" and "spacecraft").  When showing a graph of relationships between items, WontoMedia will attempt to indicate 'Parent Of' relationships as primarily vertical, with the subject-item drawn nearer "the root" of the graph and the object-item toward "the leaves". <br />'Parent Of' is typically appropriate for relationships between two categories or between two items.  To indicate that a category contains an item, the more specific 'Contains' can be used. <br />'Parent Of' is the opposite of 'Child Of'.  Creating a relationship that states one category is 'Parent Of' another is exactly the same as creating a 'Child Of' relationship with the subject and object reversed, and WontoMedia will list the relationship between then using both relationship names (which name is given priority depends on which node is more central to the display).
<span id="anchor_child_of"></span>
;child_of
:'''Child Of''' This is the fundamental type of hierarchical relationship.  This relationship states that the subject (left-hand side) of the relationship ("A" in the relationship "A is a Child-Of B", and like "spacecraft" in "spacecraft is Child-Of vehicle") is a subset of the object of the relationship ("B" and "vehicle").  When showing a graph of relationships between items, WontoMedia will attempt to indicate 'Child Of' relationships as primarily vertical, with the object-item drawn nearer "the root" of the graph and the subject-item toward "the leaves". <br />'Child Of' is typically appropriate for relationships between two categories or between two items.  To indicate that an item is contained by a category, the more specific 'One Of' can be used. <br />'Child Of' is the opposite of 'Parent Of'.  Creating a relationship that states one category is 'Child Of' another is exactly the same as creating a 'Parent Of' relationship with the subject and object reversed, and WontoMedia will list the relationship between then using both relationship names (which name is given priority depends on which node is more central to the display).
<span id="anchor_predecessor_of"></span>
;predecessor_of
:'''Predecessor Of''' This relationship states that the subject (left-hand side) of the relationship ("A" in the relationship "A is a Predecessor-Of B") precedes the object in some type of ordered sequence or collection.
<span id="anchor_successor_of"></span>
;successor_of
:'''Successor Of''' This relationship states that the subject (left-hand side) of the relationship ("N" in the relationship "N is a Successor-Of M") follows the object in some type of ordered sequence or collection.
<span id="anchor_inverse_relationship"></span>
;inverse_relationship
:'''Inverse Relationship''' This relationship is used to characterize how two other relationships relate to each other.  This relationship is used to denote that two other relationships are symmetric and inseparable opposites of each other.  For example, "Child-Of has Inverse-Relationship to Parent-Of".  WontoMedia will interpret any two relationships linked by 'Inverse Relationship' (or by a non-built in relationship that is marked as a 'SubProperty Of' 'Inverse Relationship') as being identical antonyms of each other.  Any time one relationship is created, WontoMedia will automatically infer, create, and show the matching opposite (inverse) relationship's name.
<span id="anchor_sub_property_of"></span>
;sub_property_of
:'''SubProperty Of''' This relationship is used to relate two other relationships to each other.  The statement "A is a SubProperty-Of B" says that the relationship A makes a more specific, narrow claim about nodes it relates than the relationship B does.  However, if WontoMedia has special behavior or handling for relationship B, the 'SubProperty Of' statement allows it to determine it should apply that special behavior to A as well. <br />For example, when drawing relationship graphs, WontoMedia attempts to draw all instances of 'Symmetric Relationship" in a primarily horizontal way.  There is a built-in statement that "Peer-Of is a SubProperty-Of Symmetric-Relationship", which causes 'Peer Of' relationships to be (preferentially) drawn horizontally, as will be any other types of relationships that are added to an ontology with WontoMedia.
<span id="anchor_symmetric_relationship"></span>
;symmetric_relationship
:'''Symmetric Relationship''' This is a root element in WontoMedia's internal schema.  All relationship (property) classes are children of one of three root relationship types, including this one.
<span id="anchor_value_relationship"></span>
;value_relationship
:'''Value Relationship''' This is a root element in WontoMedia's internal schema.  All relationship (property) classes are children of one of three root relationship types, including this one.
<span id="anchor_hierarchical_relationship"></span>
;hierarchical_relationship
:'''Hierarchical Relationship''' This is a root element in WontoMedia's internal schema.  All relationship (property) classes are children of one of three root relationship types, including this one.
<span id="anchor_ordered_relationship"></span>
;ordered_relationship
:'''Ordered Relationship''' This is a root element in WontoMedia's internal schema.  Properties should be made sub_property_of this property if they imply an order between their subject and object. Among other things, this property allows WontoMedia to make UI decisions.
