<!-- Copyright (c)  2011  Glen E. Ivey
     Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
     under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3;
     with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
     A copy of the license is in the file COPYING.DOCUMENTATION
  -->
====Edit this item====
Click the <tt>Edit this item</tt> link to go to the <tt>Edit</tt> page for this page's item.  An [http://wiki.wontology.org/wiki/help.php?title=Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Item item]'s <tt>Edit</tt> page allows the text of the item's [http://wiki.wontology.org/wiki/help.php?title=Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Name Name], [http://wiki.wontology.org/wiki/help.php?title=Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Title Title], and [http://wiki.wontology.org/wiki/help.php?title=Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Description Description] to be changed.

====Delete this item====
When the <tt>Delete this item</tt> link is available, click to remove this page's item from the system.  When clicked, <tt>Delete this item</tt> will cause a dialog box to be displayed, asking you to confirm that you want the item permanently removed.  Only items that are ''not'' referenced by any existing [http://wiki.wontology.org/wiki/help.php?title=Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Connection connection] can be deleted.

====Can't delete this item====
An item cannot be deleted as long as it is referenced by any existing connection.  If that is the case for this page's item, then <tt>Can't delete this item</tt> is shown instead of the <tt>Delete this item</tt> link.  Before you can delete this item, you will have to delete or edit all of the connections that reference it, which can be done from the list of this item's connections farther down the item's page.

====Show item list====
Clicking the <tt>Show item list</tt> link will take you to another page which lists all of the items currently defined in the system.

====Add a new item====
Clicking the <tt>Add a new item</tt> link will take you to another page with a form for creating a new item.  Creating an [http://wiki.wontology.org/wiki/help.php?title=Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Item item] is done by supplying text for the new item's [http://wiki.wontology.org/wiki/help.php?title=Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Name Name], [http://wiki.wontology.org/wiki/help.php?title=Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Title Title], and [http://wiki.wontology.org/wiki/help.php?title=Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Description Description].  The new item's Name must be unique.

====Show connection list====
Clicking the <tt>Show connection list</tt> link will take you to another page which lists all of the connections currently defined in the system.

====Add a new connection====
Clicking the <tt>Add a anew connection</tt> link will take you to another page with a form for creating a new connection.  Creating a connection is done by selecting the items which the new connection will reference, and can include creating new items directly within the connection-creation page itself.  A new connection must be different from all previously-defined connections.
