<!-- Copyright (c)  2011  Glen E. Ivey
     Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
     under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3;
     with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
     A copy of the license is in the file COPYING.DOCUMENTATION
  -->
<!-- This page is always served for the "About this site" link on the
     home page of http://wontology.org/.  However, it is written
     generically and with references to "this site" so that it is also
     an acceptable page for any WontoMedia-based site that does not
     (yet) have its own customized reference pages.  If you make edits
     here, please try to keep these dual uses in mind.
  -->
Welcome.  This site is a publicly-editable collection of facts and information, structured as a network of items and their interconnections.  It is a "[[Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Wontology|wontology]]", from combining "''w''iki" (publicly editable, collaborative, community created) with "''ontology''" (a knowledge representation made up of concepts and their interconnections).

As it is an openly-editable system, ''you are encouraged to add to and revise'' the information stored here.  To get started, try [[Wontology:Contributing|Adding Content]], our [[Help:Main Page|top-level online help page]], or [[Help:Wontology Concepts|Wontology Concepts]].

Information is represented here using the general mechanism of [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#Connection|connections]] between [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#Item|items]], which allows virtually any set of facts and relationships to be stored.  This includes very simple data sets like lists, trees, and hierarchies as well as more complex arrangements like faceted classifications, taxonomies, mind maps, controlled vocabularies, thesauri, and (full) ontologies.  The data representations used are completely compatible with the [http://www.w3.org/ W3C]'s [http://www.w3.org/RDF/ RDF] and [http://www.w3.org/standards/techs/owl Web Ontology Language (OWL)] standards.

(The content of the site is freely available for other people's modification and reuse under the terms of the [http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html GNU Free Documentation License].  In order to permit this licensing, by contributing content to this site, you assign the copyright of that content to the site owner.)

Note that, at the moment, we don't have separate user logins and we don't yet have the ability for contributors to reverse (roll-back) erroneous changes to the data.  You are absolutely welcome and encouraged to modify, expand, and improve the information stored here.  Please make all the additions you want&mdash;we ask only that you be slightly more hesitant to remove information contributed by others (data items or large chunks of an item's description) than to make new contributions of your own.

This site is hosted using the [[Help:GlossaryPtoZ#WontoMedia|WontoMedia]] web application software, which is free to use to create your own wontology site as well.
