<!-- Copyright (c)  2010  Glen E. Ivey
     Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
     under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3;
     with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
     A copy of the license is in the file COPYING.DOCUMENTATION
  -->
This is the main press page for the WontoMedia software development project and the http://wontology.org/ web site that uses it.  See also [http://wiki.wontology.org/wiki/help.php?title=Adas_Daughters:Press_Info the press page] for http://AdasDaughters.org/, which also runs WontoMedia.

== Summary ==

'''''WontoMedia''''' is a web application package for hosting a Wontology (a [[Wikipedia:Wiki|Wiki]]-[[Wikipedia:Ontology_(information_science)|Ontology]]): a classification scheme created and maintained by a community.  It is free/libre/open-source software ([[Wikipedia:FLOSS|FLOSS]]).

Definitions (from our glossary):

* [[Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Wontology|Wontology]]
* [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Ontology|Ontology]]

WontoMedia is written in [http://ruby-lang.org/ Ruby] (with [[Wikipedia::JavaScript]] for in-browser features) on top of the [http://rubyonrails.org/ Ruby-on-Rails] framework.  It has been developed and deployed on Linux systems, but should run on any server systems supported by Ruby-on-Rails, and be accessible from any modern web browser.

For more introductory information, see:

* [[WontoMedia]]
* http://wontomedia.rubyforge.org
* the [[Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_WontoMedia|WontoMedia entry in our glossary]]
* WontoMedia's on-line [[Help:Main Page|help pages]]

Development of WontoMedia began in March of 2009, with <tt>wontology.org</tt> opening for public alpha in January 2010, and the first version-numbered release in February of 2010.  Please see [http://rubygems.org/gems/wontomedia our entry on RubyGems.org] for the latest version number and release date.

== Contacts ==

The project founder is Glen Ivey.  Please contact for any press questions:

* email: <tt>gleneivey at wontology dot org</tt>
* alternate email: <tt>gei at mcn dot org</tt>
* twitter: [http://twitter.com/gleneivey @gleneivey]
* telephone: 707-367-3156 (USA Pacific-time)
* other:
** [http://github.com/gleneivey/ GitHub account]
** <tt>gleneivey</tt> on Skype, Yahoo! IM, and AIM

== Sites Using WontoMedia ==

* http://wontology.org/
* http://adasdaughters.org/
