WontoMedia is a Ruby-on-Rails web application for the community
creation of information classification schemes.  It is free software,
available under the AGPL v3.

General information on the project is in, and pointed to from, the
project-wide README.markdown file.  This is located two directories
above this set of RDoc pages, and also available at
http://github.com/gleneivey/wontomedia/blob/master/README.markdown

In addition to the documentation of WontoMedia's Ruby source code here
in these pages, there are extensive automated tests for WontoMedia's
behavior, which make up the "other half" of WontoMedia's
documentation.  The following is a brief description of where these
tests are located.  For more information see
http://wiki.wontology.org/Testing_Your_Work

System-level acceptance tests, which validate the primary user-visible
features and behaviors, are located in the directories:

    features/stories/static
    features/stories/dynamic

The "stories" (individual user tasks that can be performed using
WontoMedia) are divided between these two directories based on whether
all of the behavior being tested is implemented by WontoMedia's
server-side Ruby code (the stories in the +static+ directory) or is
implemented in part by browser-side technologies like JavaScript code
downloaded in/by the web pages WontoMedia (the stories in the
+dynamic+ directory).

Each story is stored in a separate .+feature+ file.  These are
interpreted by the test tool *Cucumber* (see
http://wiki.github.com/aslakhellesoy/cucumber ), and are intended to
be human-readable.  The particular Cucumber dialect we use references
component names within web pages, but having seen and worked with
WontoMedia some, the meaning of these references should be clear.

All other tests for WontoMedia are located under the +test+
directory:

[*test/functional*, *test/integration*, and *test/fixtures*] The content of these directories follow standard Rails practice.

[*test/javascript*] This directory contains the unit tests for the portions of WontoMedia written in JavaScript that execute within web browsers accessing a WontoMedia server.  These tests are written for and executed by the open-source tool *Blue Ridge*, see http://github.com/relevance/blue-ridge/

[*test/unit/app*] This directory contains the rest of the standard Rails unit tests.  It contains the sub-directories +helpers+, +models+, and +views+, which match what is typically found directly under the +test+ directory in some other Rails projects.

[*test/unit/config*, *test/unit/db*, and *test/unit/lib*] These directories contain unit tests for the code located in the project's top-level +config+, +db+, and +lib+, respectively.  The tests in these directories use the standard Rails testing frameworks, plus the publicly-available +migration_test_helper+ gem.
