<!-- Copyright (c)  2011  Glen E. Ivey
     Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
     under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3;
     with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
     A copy of the license is in the file COPYING.DOCUMENTATION
  -->
The most fundamental action for adding to the content of a [[Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchcor_Wontology|wontology]] is to create a new [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Item|item]].  To start the process of creating a item, click one of the <tt>Create a new item</tt> links.  One of these links is located on virtually all pages of a wontology.  If you don't see such a link on the wontology page you're currently viewing, go to the wontology's home page.  For example, the page http://wontology.org/.  There are lists of links immediately before and after the listing of the wontology's current content on the home page, and each list includes a <tt>Create a new item</tt> link.

Clicking <tt>Create a new item</tt> will take you to the new-item form.  This form contains for fields:

* '''Type''' &mdash; This is used to select the type of the item you are creating.  Once an item is created, other information about it can be edited, but its type is permanent.  The form page contains a brief description of each possible type, and you can read each type's glossary entry (for [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Category|Category]], for [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Individual|Individual]], and for [[Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Property|Property]]) for more information.  You must select a type in order to create a new item.  ''For this tutorial, select "Individual".''
* '''Title''' &mdash; The [[Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Title|Title]] is a line of text describing what your new item represents.  You must supply a Title in order to create a new item, but it can be edited later.  If part of a Title's text is in parentheses, like "or not" in "A good title (or not)", then the parenthetical will not be displayed in places with less room.  ''For this tutorial, type a Title string like "John Smith's Car"'', only using your own name.
* '''Name''' &mdash; The [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Name|Name]] is a short piece of text that will be used as the ''unique'' identifier for this item throughout the wontology.  When creating a new item, [[Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_WontoMedia|WontoMedia]] will automatically generate a suggested Name from the Title you type.  Like Title, the Name is required.  In addition, each item's Name must be unique.  Depending on the Title you give, the suggested Name might not be unique, in which case you'll have to modify it or provide a different one.  You will not be allowed to complete the creation of a new item until the Name value is present, valid (no forbidden characters), and unique within the wontology.  If you have followed along with the example steps, ''WontoMedia will have already filled in Name with something like "JohnSmithsCar"'', only including your name.
* '''Description''' &mdash; The [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Description|Description]] is an optional block of text, as many lines/paragraphs as you'd like, intended to allow other people to correctly understand what the item references and how to use it when creating [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Connection|connections]] ([[Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Relationship|relationships]]) that reference it.  ''For this tutorial, you can fill the Description in with anything you'd like'', or leave it blank.

If you've followed along with the tutorial instructions, you should now be able to click the "Create" button and have your new item created.  However, because item Names must be unique, there is the possibility that someone else has previously followed this tutorial and created an item with the same Name that you've picked.  In this case, you'll have to change the value of Name  before you can click "Create".

When you do click "Create", WontoMedia will add a new item to the system using the information you provided, and show you the information page specifically for that item.  Since it is new, no connections will be listed on the page.  Note that in WontoMedia, all information is manipulated "live".  Your new item, even though it is simply the product of following along with this tutorial and not a "real" piece of information in the wontology, is immediately visible and included in all item lists visible to you and to anyone else visiting the wontology site.

Assuming you've followed along and created a "test" item, it would be considerate for you to now ''delete'' your new item from the wontology if you are done.  (If you are going to go on to another tutorial, you can leave your new item for use in the other tutorials, and delete it when you are all done.)  This is accomplished by clicking the <tt>Delete this item</tt> link from the set of links below your item's information.  When you click <tt>Delete this item</tt>, a confirmation dialog box will be displayed.  Click <tt>OK</tt> in the dialog box, and your new item will be removed from the wontology, and the full list of items in the system displayed.

Note also that, because all of the information in a wontology is both live and shared, another person could also decide to delete the test item you have created.

Now that you can create items, the next steps in learning to use WontoMedia are to [[Help:Tutorials/Creating a Connection|create a connection]] connecting multiple items, and to create a simple set of related items and connections, perhaps representing [[Help:Tutorials/Creating a List|a simple list]] of items.
