<!-- Copyright (c)  2011  Glen E. Ivey
     Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
     under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3;
     with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
     A copy of the license is in the file COPYING.DOCUMENTATION
  -->
<!-- ads: "Information Architecture with Ontologies" -->
<amazonwidget adcode="ed7d9394-e0d3-450a-bebb-ca632b7b99d6" />
This is a brief summary that relates key concepts within a wontology.  There is a more narrative introduction in the help page describing how [[Help:Information as Relationships|information is represented as relationships]], and each term defined below links to that term's entry in our [[Help:GlossaryAtoO|Glossary]].

* A [[Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Wontology|wontology]] is made up of [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Item|items]] and [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Connection|connections]].
* An item represents something, concrete or abstract, that the wontology describes.
* A connection represents a particular relationship between two items, with the type of relationship identified by a third item.

* Each item has a type and several standard text fields
** The text fields include its [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Name|Name]], its [[Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Title|Title]], and optionally a text [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Description|Description]].
*** An item's Name should be short, and is used to create URLs and other computer-parsed symbols.
*** An item's Title should be a one-line description of what the item represents.
*** An item's (optional) Description is intended to be read by people to understand/maintain the contents of the wontology.
** An item's type can be [[#Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Category|Category]],  [[#Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Individual|Individual]], or [[#Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Property|Property]].
*** Category items can contain (in [[#Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Hierarchical|hierarchical]] relationships) Category and/or Individual items.
*** Individual items can contain only Individual items and not Category items.
*** Only Property items can be referred to as a connection's predicate.

* Each connection references three items, a [[Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Subject|subject]], a [[Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Predicate|predicate]], and an [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Object|object]].
* Two connections in the ontology cannot be identical (that is, refer to exactly the same three items in the same order).
* Connections are directional, and always go "from" the subject item "to" the object item.
** Predicate types (represented by Property-type items) can be defined so that creating a connection using that predicate ''implies'' a second connection going from the explicit connection's object back to its subject.
** An implied connection cannot be "duplicated" by the explicit creation of an identical connection.

* The meaning of a Property-type item is determined by its relationships to other Property items (Properties).
* Property-type items can be the subjects and objects of connections just like the other item types can.
* Based on their relationships, some Properties represent [[Help:GlossaryAtoO#anchor_Hierarchical|hierarchical relationships]] and some represent [[Help:GlossaryPtoZ#anchor_Peer|peer relationships]].
** Hierarchical and peer relationships are opposites of each other; a single Property cannot indicate both.
** A relationship need not be either hierarchical or peer.
